WASHINGTON (CNNMoney) -- Roberton Williams is a senior fellow at the
Urban Institute and contributor to TaxVox, the blog of the nonpartisan
research organization Tax Policy Center. He was at the Congressional Budget
Office from 1984 through 2006. The opinions expressed in this commentary are
solely those of the writer.

President Obama's plan to raise taxes on the nation's highest income
households may not quite mean what you think.

A closer look suggests that fewer people may get whacked than either Obama
or his Republican critics suggest.

And for many of the victims, the club won't be the president's plan to raise
rates to 36% and 39.6%. Those rate hikes are getting most of the attention,
but the real cudgel would be higher taxes on capital gains and dividends
going to high-earners.

First, let's look at whom Obama's plan would hit.

As most everyone knows by now, ever since his presidential campaign, Obama
has promised to retain the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts for households with
income below $250,000 and individuals making less than $200,000.

That seems clear enough, but candidate Obama never said what he meant by
"income," although his budget helps to clarify the issue by defining income
very generously.

Defining "income": First, let's define our terms.

The broadest way to measure income -- total income -- counts everything you
get in cash, regardless of source, including taxes your employer pays and
you never see. By that measure, just over 3% of households have income above
the president's thresholds.

Or the president could have decided to use a narrower measure, "adjusted
gross income," which excludes income not subject to federal tax such as
tax-exempt bond interest and much of Social Security benefits. Just over
2% of tax units have AGI that tops the $200,000 and $250,000 thresholds.

Finally, the president could have gone one more step and dropped exemptions
and deductions from his definition of income. That's the familiar description
of taxable income -- and pretty much the bottom line on your 1040 -- and it
would protect another 0.2% of households from a tax hike.

How Obama does it: Instead, Obama -- in his budget -- uses a definition
that is even a bit more generous than any of those.

To make sure that no one making less than $200,000 really does get hit
with a tax increase, the president had to extend the 28% bracket to cover
more income. That would cut taxes for even the richest taxpayers by a few
hundred dollars and provide a small cushion against higher levies for people
just over the thresholds.

Who would pay and why: When all the dust settles, the Tax Policy Center
 figures that just 1.7% of households would pay higher taxes under the
president's proposal than if Congress extended all the 2001 and 2003 tax
cuts.

Just as interesting is why those 2.7 million high-income taxpayers would
get hit. For most of them, the answer is not the high-profile increase in
the top rates. Rather, it is Obama's proposal to hike rates on capital gains
and dividends.

A close look at his plan shows that fewer than three in ten affected
taxpayers would be hit by the 36% and 39.6% rates on ordinary income that
have drawn the loudest complaints.

Another change, the limitation on itemized deductions and the phaseout of
personal exemptions would affect less than half.

But nearly 95% of people facing higher tax bills would pay more tax on
gains and dividends. Keep in mind, by the way, that while Obama would raise
the top rate on capital gains from 15% to 20%, he would also tax qualified
dividends at 20%. If the Bush-era tax cuts are allowed to expire, the top
dividend rate would hit 39.6%.

Knowing that less than 2% of households would face higher taxes, mostly
because of their investment income, won't calm the debate -- and by itself
certainly provides no justification for backing the president's plan -- but
it's always helpful to know the facts.