The Israeli viewers of the excellent American television series, "The Sopranos,"
were met with a bleak surprise near its end - in trying to escape from a deep
depression, the son of the head of the crime family feels even worse after learning
for the first time, in college, about the Middle East and the two nations (the
Palestinians and the Israelis) apparently fighting there forever. Each side talks
about the holiness of the land and the edict of God, with neither side prepared to
yield; therefore there is neither an end to, nor hope for, this conflict. It is
vident that even the Mafioso world, with its murderous vendettas, pales in
omparison to our region - so devoid of hope and redemption.

If someone viewing our situation from afar, especially from New Jersey, gets so
depressed, just imagine the depths of melancholy the two wretched nations should
sink to; the abyss of desperation we should have been thrown into by the winning
political concept - the almost official one (at least as expressed this week by
our foreign minister) that this is a never-ending, religious and built-in conflict
- and all that is left to do is "conduct it." And conduct it with enjoyment.

Despair? Depression? Sorrow? There is nothing further from the Israel of today.
On the contrary. The final farewell to any hopes for peace also includes large
and small celebrations, as witnessed in the strange euphoria that has swept across
the Israeli street and media following Mahmoud al-Mabhouh's assassination in
Dubai. It seems "Shoshanat Yaakov" (the "Rose of Jacob," referring to the events
of Purim in Shushan) has not been sung with such enthusiasm since Haman and his
sons were hanged - or at least since the Entebbe rescue mission. Even the
"families" in New Jersey do not express as much glee when someone is liquidated,
nor do they wallow in such enjoyment, day after day, as they describe every minute
detail of the event.

It is indeed doubtful that anyone on the street or in the media had ever heard of
this same al-Mabhouh when he was alive; and it is even more doubtful whether his
assassination furthered our interests in the region or in the world by even a
millimeter. However, as the poet said, "the joy of the poor knocked on the door,"
a kind of joy that instead reveals wretchedness and a lack of expectations - a
country that has already despaired of existential or realistic tidings and finds
consolation, even entertainment, only in "operational" episodes and legends, as if
it were living out an eternal national childhood.

The celebrations around the liquidation should not surprise us; they are part of a
general reactionary, and somewhat infantile, wave which the current Israeli government,
inspired by its leader, has been conducting. In the attempt to avoid making real
ecisions, and to divert attention, official Israel behaves as if our lives were a
presentation in a kindergarten belonging to the religious Zionist stream - including
games in which we are "not on speaking terms" with the entire world; attempts to
inculcate a heritage that is nothing more than yearning for some Land of Israel
Judaism (as opposed to Israeli identity), in which Tel Hai and Rachel's Tomb get
confused; and the emergency revival of some kind of archaic "information" campaign,
which acts as if Israel's greatest problem is that it has the image of being a
backward desert country where people ride camels.

Is this really our image problem right now? Camels? Not our being an anomaly devoid
of borders and identity, even after 60 years of independence? Not our being a nation
losing the very legitimacy for its existence in world public opinion by ruling over
another nation? By foregoing a definition of itself as secular? By putting the keys
to its fate in the hands of theocratic settlers?

Here and there, some rare visitor will still arrive, in an ever more limp attempt to
push something forward in the region - to save Israel from itself - and then he leaves
insulted and disparaged. How can he help when the leaders in the region seem to have
washed their hands of dealing with their own problem? From their point of view, let it
go on bleeding. As long as the blood is not spilled too publicly, it can be ignored
and other matters can be dealt with - beginning with the reforms to close balconies
and renovate tombstones, and ending with the issue of housekeepers. And if the blood
is spilled far away, we can even rejoice and be merry. How does the old Purim song
go? "Lend a shoulder, close your eyes / It is Purim and we can forget everything."
And no longer just once a year but, as the hope is expressed in another Purim song,
twice a week. 